 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice  
for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3: Informative Annexes 
Annex S: Working Over Water 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex S 
 
© IRATA International 
Annex S: Page 2 of 10 
    03/10/2024 v001
 
 
1 INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Scope and Purpose 
Many industries and regions utilise rope access methods as an effective and appropriate means of 
access and egress when conducting operational works over water (any activity conducted on or above 
a body of water e.g. river, lake, sea or ocean). Regardless of the location that works are being conducted 
e.g. offshore on an oil platform into the sea, or onshore from a bridge into a river, the primary hazard 
remains unchanged, that being a fall from height into water, with the added risk of drowning. Taking this 
into consideration, working safely over water may require additional permits, environmental awareness, 
and specific safety measures, equipment and training due to the inherent risks associated with the 
environment.  
 
This annex provides information and guidance on conducting industrial rope access works over water 
and is intended to assist with identifying associated hazards, risks and controls, and highlights the 
requirement for additional equipment and permits. 
 
The information provided within this annex is intended as guidance and is non-exhaustive. 
 
Note: For further guidance refer to the relevant specialist publications listed in Section S.12.   
2 TERMS, DEFINITIONS & ABBREVIATIONS 
EIA  
Environmental Impact Assessment 
Exclusion Zone 
designated area around a site or structure where entry is restricted 
or prohibited to ensure safety of the workers and third parties   
GFCI                                                  Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter 
PFD 
Personal Flotation Device 
PFPE 
Personal Fall Protection Equipment 
PLB 
Personal Locator Beacon  
PPE                                                    Personal Protective Equipment 
SAR 
Search and Rescue 
Splash Zone 
refers to a specific area that is intermittently exposed to water due 
to waves and spray 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex S 
 
© IRATA International 
Annex S: Page 3 of 10 
    03/10/2024 v001
 
S.1 Water Characteristics and Safety Considerations  
Prior to commencing works over water it is important to conduct a risk assessment, taking into 
consideration the potential hazards and characteristics of the water being worked over, thereby enabling 
the identification of appropriate controls to be implemented. The table below lists potential hazards and 
water characteristics and their associated safety considerations: 
Potential Hazards & 
Water Characteristics 
Safety Considerations 
Depth 
Working over water of any depth requires a rapidly implementable rescue 
plan, due to the high potential of drowning. Even in relatively shallow water, 
this hazard may be increased due to the additional weight of Personal Fall 
Protection Equipment (PFPE), tools and equipment associated with rope 
access operational works. 
Temperature 
Sudden immersion into cold water may cause a spike in heart rate and blood 
pressure, which may increase the risk of heart failure or stroke in some 
casualties. Commonly, sudden immersion into water can cause a casualty 
to panic, stress and hyperventilate, with continued exposure being likely to 
impair a casualty’s movements, thinking and decision-making abilities. 
Buoyancy 
Historically, tests have demonstrated that highly aerated water (also known 
as white or non-buoyant water), has differing effects on a casualty’s ability 
to stay at the surface of the water. Findings also indicate that air becoming 
trapped in a casualty’s clothing may help keep them at the surface, however, 
highly aerated water has less resistance when a casualty tries to swim or 
orient themselves within it; this continuous water movement and increased 
effort will make it difficult for a casualty to become or remain calm. 
Flow rate 
Fast flowing water of relatively shallow depths can cause a casualty to lose 
footing and be swept along with the current, which may hamper a rescue as 
the location of the casualty may change very quickly. The risk of 
entanglement also increases with more movement. 
Tides/Currents 
Tides and currents should be considered when attempting to anticipate the 
movement and direction of a casualty who enters the water, e.g. the 
positioning of a rescue boat in a location that facilitates a rapid rescue as per 
the tide or current. 
Contaminants 
There may be risks associated with contaminants within the water, which 
would require a separate risk assessment and appropriate controls. 
Examples of risks include, waterborne diseases, Weil’s disease, stagnant 
water, and certain types of algae which present known health risks. 
Marine traffic 
If the worksite (e.g. a bridge) is over a navigable waterway, prior to 
commencing work consent may need to be acquired from the relevant 
navigational authority to proceed, ensuring that the works will not obstruct 
waterway navigation and will not compromise the safety of others and the 
rope access technicians (e.g. dropped objects, rope entanglement etc.). 
Offshore wind farms, and oil and gas installations coordinate with various 
authorities, e.g. coast guard, International Maritime Organisation etc. and 
are required to comply with international and national regulations, to notify 
marine traffic about their respective offshore installations. 
Flooding 
Tidal rivers experience the effects of the tide from the ocean (rise and fall 
with the ocean tides, typically twice a day). The direction of the river's flow 
may reverse during incoming tide and be accompanied with a rise of the 
water level (flood). Such changes in conditions should be considered in the 
risk assessment, method statement and rescue plan when working over tidal 
rivers. 
Other hazards 
Submerged obstacles which may be struck or result in entanglement. 
Dangerous wildlife will need to be considered in certain regions. 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex S 
 
© IRATA International 
Annex S: Page 4 of 10 
    03/10/2024 v001
 
S.2 Tools and Equipment 
Risk assessments should consider the risks associated with using tools, equipment and materials over 
and around water, including the potential for contaminants (e.g. oils, paints, chemicals etc.) to be 
introduced to the water and their impact on wildlife. Controls and emergency containment plans should 
be considered to ensure that there is no or minimal impact to the environment from contaminants, in 
line with local and international regulations.  
Considerations to help minimise equipment risks to personnel should include: 
a) 
Limiting the amount of equipment 
Reducing the amount of weight that is directly attached to the technician, will decrease the buoyancy 
requirement that is needed, to keep a technician at the surface, having entered the water. An example 
of this would be ensuring that where practicable any tools and equipment not related directly to the 
technician’s PFPE are suspended independently of the technician.  
b) 
Control of ropes and lanyards 
Ropes and lanyards either trailing in the water or attached to a technician may result in entanglement 
during operations or in the event that they enter the water. The use of ropes and lanyards should be 
given due consideration during risk assessment to ensure appropriate control measures are put in 
place, e.g. keeping ropes bagged when working above water may prevent potential entanglement and 
could provide a buoyant connection to a technician entering the water. However, the use of a rope bag 
may result in additional weight that is not buoyant being connected to the technician, thereby increasing 
the risk of being pulled under water.  
c) 
Using power tools near water 
Water and especially salt water are effective at conducting electricity, therefore using power tools near 
water can be hazardous e.g. electric shock, short circuits, tool malfunction, burns and explosions. The 
additional risks of using power tools near water should be considered during risk assessment and 
mitigated against in preparation for the project. 
List of considerations (non-exhaustive): 
• 
corded (240V/110V) or cordless tools; 
• 
Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter (GFCI) or equivalent should be used. GFCI outlets/breakers can 
detect electrical faults and shut off power to prevent a potential electrical shock; 
• 
water-resistant or outdoor rated tools; 
• 
power cords, plugs and electrical connections to be insulated (protected against water access) 
and undamaged; and 
• 
appropriate PPE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex S 
 
© IRATA International 
Annex S: Page 5 of 10 
    03/10/2024 v001
 
S.3 Personal Life-saving Appliances 
A life jacket is designed to turn an unconscious person face up in the water, while a buoyancy aid is 
designed to assist a conscious person to swim to safety. This must be considered when selecting the 
right equipment for the task. 
Note: The minimum of 275N buoyancy, twin chamber life jacket with ‘crotch’ straps may be a requirement on 
commercial offshore installations. This is to take the extra weight e.g. tools and harness, into consideration to 
ensure the casualty remains positively buoyant and to stop the life jacket from slipping over the wearer’s head 
when entering the water. 
Personal Flotation Device (PFD) 
Offshore installations, oil and gas, offshore wind and the marine industry have specific requirements for 
PFDs. 
There are PFDs available which are designed and manufactured to be used in conjunction with PFPE. 
Whilst the use of PFDs is not mandatory in certain industries, it is recommended that the use of life 
jackets for working over water, and their compatibility with PFPE should be assessed to determine their 
requirement and suitability for their intended use. Additionally, the decision to not use PFDs when 
working over water requires assessment and justification. 
Standards 
It is important to check the PFD requirements when preparing for a project, and when being issued 
with one, to ensure it meets site and local requirements, such as those defined by the: 
• 
International Maritime Organisation (IMO, SOLAS) 
• 
International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) 
• 
European Union (EN) 
• 
United States Coast Guard (USCG) 
 
Note: The above list is not exhaustive. 
Note: SOLAS (International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974), Chapter III ‘Life-saving appliances and 
arrangements’ includes information on the requirements for life-saving appliances and arrangements, including life 
jackets according to ship type.  
Personal Locator Beacons (PLBs) 
PLBs are devices to be equipped with when working at open sea. The purpose of the PLB is to aid with 
locating a casualty if they fall into water. It is important to ensure that the PLB is ‘armed’ when first 
received, and to check the battery status regularly (for further guidance on how to do this, refer to the 
manufacturer’s instructions or ask the supervisor). 
S.4 Suitable Clothing for Working Over and Around Water 
Working over and around water can have its own environmental challenges. Working on bridges, dams 
and offshore installations can often leave a technician more exposed to the elements than in an urban 
environment. The extra elements of exposure include: 
• 
the ambient temperature given by the weather forecast or measured at ‘ground’ level may not 
be representative of the perceived temperature at height, due to wind chill, humidity and even 
radiation from the water. This factor should be considered when selecting appropriate clothing 
for the task being conducted. 
• 
working within the Splash Zone refers to working in a specific area, that is intermittently exposed 
to water due to waves and spray. Wet clothing can significantly increase the risk of hypothermia 
and negatively affect a technician’s ability to concentrate. Waterproof clothing should be worn 
when working in or near the Splash Zone. 
Note: Working in the Splash Zone may introduce other risks and hazards, e.g. using power tools in a wet 
environment, slippery structures and surfaces, and non-fatal/secondary drowning etc. 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex S 
 
© IRATA International 
Annex S: Page 6 of 10 
    03/10/2024 v001
 
S.5 Locating a Casualty in the Water in Low Light Conditions or Reduced 
Visibility 
To locate and recover a casualty from the water during the hours of darkness or in reduced visibility is 
challenging and can take considerably longer than during the daytime and under normal visibility, 
therefore increasing the risk of hypothermia, being swept away or into a structure, or losing sight of the 
casualty in the water. Working over water in such conditions should be avoided, where possible, 
however, when unavoidable extra safety measures should be taken, such as: 
• 
using personally issued water activated lights; 
• 
illuminating the immediate surrounding water surface; 
• 
the issuing and correct use of a PLB by the technician; 
• 
assigning a designated lookout/spotter; 
• 
the implementation of a robust Search and Rescue (SAR) procedure and collaboration with local 
SAR teams; and 
• 
conducting regular head counts. 
S.6 Exclusion Zones & Marine Traffic  
When working at height, a suitable Exclusion Zone below the work area should be present. Offshore 
sites and installations can implement Exclusion Zones when working over water, to stop unauthorised 
vessels from entering the area. The size and duration of the Exclusion Zone should be communicated 
over the radio to all the vessels operating in the area. Working over inland waters can make 
implementing an Exclusion Zone challenging, or even impossible if marine traffic cannot be disrupted. 
In such cases other safety measures e.g. safety netting, may be implemented to protect third party 
personnel, vessels, and rope access technicians and their anchor lines. 
Note: An Exclusion Zone may be a third-party requirement or could be requested by the operating company. The 
need for an Exclusion Zone should be considered during the risk assessment. 
S.7 Permit Requirements  
Working over water operations may require multiple permits, from multiple authorities. These 
requirements should be assessed in the planning stage of the project and work should only commence 
when all the required permits are issued, to avoid fines and delays in the project.  
Permit requirements may vary in different countries and regions. Below are examples of permit 
requirements and types: 
• 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA): As a prerequisite to obtaining a permit and 
depending on the scope of work, an EIA may be required to evaluate potential environmental 
impacts and control measures. 
• 
Permits for water and wetlands: If a bridge spans over water bodies or wetlands, permits may 
be required to ensure the protection of aquatic ecosystems. 
• 
Marine permits: When a bridge spans over navigable waters, permits may be required from 
maritime authorities to ensure that marine traffic is not disrupted (see Section S.1). 
• 
Permit to Work: This type of permit system is commonly used and is a mandatory requirement 
for high-risk activities in the oil and gas industry. The offshore wind industry also requires a 
specific permit system to gain access to assets and to operate on them.  
Note: For further information and guidance on Permits to Work refer to the ICOP, Sections 2.2.4.5, 2.11.7.1, 
2.11.7.6, and 2.11.14. 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex S 
 
© IRATA International 
Annex S: Page 7 of 10 
    03/10/2024 v001
 
S.8 Overboard Procedures and Standby Rescue Vessels 
When working over water at a remote offshore location, a standby rescue vessel should be present or 
in the vicinity, to provide assistance and enable the retrieval of a casualty from the water. Additionally, 
in case of a rope access rescue scenario, a rescue party may abseil straight onto the standby rescue 
vessel without entering the water, therefore reducing the risk of drowning.   
If using a standby rescue vessel on moving water, such as a river, the type used should be suitable for 
the water characteristics. All involved personnel need to know how to act in an emergency, how to raise 
the alarm and what their role is during a rescue. 
For rescues using a standby vessel, further considerations include: 
• 
the requirement for additional training, e.g. sea survival; 
• 
the delivery of a toolbox talk covering the rescue plan, procedures and roles; and 
• 
establishing effective coordination and communication with the standby rescue vessel crew.  
 
In moving water such as rivers, a standby vessel may not be a viable option due to the nature of the 
water or associated costs.  Therefore, other feasible options should be considered to retrieve a casualty 
from the water, such as deploying a brightly coloured and buoyant throw line to retrieve the casualty, or 
the use of a grab line that can be tensioned downstream of the worksite for self-rescue purposes. 
Suitable rescue methods should be considered and selected during planning. 
S.9 The Effects of Water on Rope Access Equipment 
The concentration of water vapor in the air (humidity) is closely related to the distance from bodies of 
water. Meaning the air over or near water is more humid than in-land. Sea water introduces higher salt 
content into the air (sea salt aerosol), which can have detrimental effects on rope access equipment 
that is submerged in, or used or stored in close proximity. For example, salt crystals can cause physical 
abrasion on the surface or inside manmade fibres, therefore affecting anchor lines (ropes), harnesses 
and fabric slings etc.  
The table below details the effects of water and salt water on materials used in rope access equipment: 
Material 
Potential effects of water on the material 
Nylon 
salt can catalyse the hydrolysis of nylon, especially under humid conditions, 
leading to breakdown of polymer chains and a loss of strength 
Polyester 
relatively resistant to the chemical effect of salt; however, salt can accelerate the 
degradation caused by UV exposure 
Metals 
water, moisture in the air, and salt can cause corrosion of metal items and 
components of rope access equipment, leading to deterioration in strength and/or 
performance 
Steel 
the accumulations of salt residues on steel surfaces or being in high humidity 
conditions can promote corrosion of steel surfaces 
Stainless steel 
is resistant to corrosion due to an oxide layer on its surface. However, the oxide 
layer can be compromised under mechanical stress or by damage, exposing the 
steel underneath, allowing a route for corrosion to occur due to the accumulation 
of salt residue and/or exposure to high humidity 
Aluminium and 
aluminium alloys 
are resistant to corrosion due to an oxide layer on its surface. However, the oxide 
layer can be compromised under mechanical stress or by damage, exposing the 
material underneath, allowing a route for corrosion to occur due to the 
accumulation of salt residue and/or exposure to high humidity 
 
It is important to conduct regular checks of materials for pitting, uneven or rough surfaces, 
discolouration, and changed or restricted functionality of metal items. 
 
Discolouration and hardened or softened webbing of manmade fibres may be an indication of 
contamination or damage.  
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex S 
 
© IRATA International 
Annex S: Page 8 of 10 
    03/10/2024 v001
 
Reducing the time between thorough examinations of equipment and/or interim inspections may enable 
the early detection of corrosion or deterioration that, if mitigated against can prevent an incident. Having 
a scheduled equipment cleaning and maintenance regime can prevent against salt accumulation. 
Additionally, suitably environmentally controlled equipment storage spaces may provide an effective 
method for reducing the exposure to and detrimental effects of water, when equipment is not in use. 
S.10 Rescue Planning and Requirements 
Rescue from a working over water situation can be complex and requires extra considerations and 
preparation. ‘Rescue down’ is considered to be best practice and the most efficient way to get a casualty 
to safety, whether by means of a lowering system or a simple intervention rescue. However, this may 
not be a viable option in situations where moving water presents additional challenges, such as the 
current moving too fast for a rescue vessel to safely manoeuvre under a casualty, too shallow for it to 
operate and/or the local marine authority does not permit the use of the vessel due to marine traffic in 
the area. In such cases, rescue hauling or the diagonal deviation of the casualty when lowered should 
be considered as a means of rescue. 
When compared to urban locations, working over water can increase exposure to the elements, which 
should be considered when planning for the protection of technicians against environmental conditions 
(see Section S.4). Exposure to environmental conditions may have negative effects on the affective 
implementation of a rescue plan, and this must be considered during the risk assessment and when 
setting environmental limits in documents.  
Environmental considerations for rescue planning should include: 
• 
the maximum workable wind speed considering a rescue;  
• 
the effects of wind gusts on a rescue; 
• 
the effects of wind shear on a rescue, and how it is related to the structure; and 
• 
the effects of changing wind direction (natural or on the structure) on a rescue. 
Note: More guidance can be found in Annex R: Rescue and Evacuation Planning and Considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex S 
 
© IRATA International 
Annex S: Page 9 of 10 
    03/10/2024 v001
 
S.11 Disembarking or Transferring  
Some examples of fixed structures in water include wind turbines, substations, meteorological masts 
and oil and gas platforms. Due to being exposed to harsh weather conditions, these structures require 
regular maintenance.  
Rope access is often used on installations as the preferred method of working at height and boats and 
vessels are commonly used as means of transportation to such structures. Once the destination is 
reached, technicians will have to transfer from the vessel onto the structure to carry out rope access 
works. Transfer of technicians to and from the structure is considered a high-risk activity, that requires 
adequate risk assessment and documented procedures. Personnel involved in such operations should 
be physically fit, well rested and may require additional offshore operations related training.  
Boats and vessels, like any other vehicle or machine, can break down or get damaged during operation. 
When a vessel breaks down or gets seriously damaged, technicians may be required to transfer over 
to another vessel. A vessel-to-vessel transfer is a high-risk activity and should be considered as a last 
resort, requiring thorough risk assessment and planning. 
 
The table below provide examples of potential hazards and controls associated with disembarking and 
transfers: 
Hazards 
Control 
Sea sickness (e.g. motion sickness). Even 
though it is not related to disembarking or 
transfers, it can have a negative impact on a 
technician’s health. Sea sickness can develop 
during transportation on water and should not be 
disregarded. 
Symptoms 
may 
include 
frequent 
vomiting 
causing dehydration, inability to consume any 
food which may lead to nutritional deficiency, 
fatigue, weakness, and in some cases even 
impaired 
judgement 
and 
coordination. 
Transferring and climbing a structure in such 
condition can be dangerous. 
Encourage people to speak up if they feel 
seasick. 
Sometimes 
when 
an 
individual 
experiences sea sickness the only solution is to 
return to shore or a solid structure, removing the 
elements that are causing the sickness. 
Sea sickness/motion sickness tablets should be 
used with caution as some have adverse side 
effects. 
Being crushed by the vessel when transferring. 
Transferring between the vessel and a structure 
is considered high risk as a rogue wave, wind 
gust or loss of engine power may lead to the 
technician being struck or crushed by the vessel. 
Weather and sea conditions should be closely 
and constantly monitored. If the conditions are 
not adequate or the technician doesn’t feel safe 
to transfer, they shouldn’t be forced to do so.  
Certain industries i.e. wind power generation, oil 
and gas, have strict rules regarding weather limits 
and procedures for transferring which must be 
adhered to. 
Falling into the water or the possibility of it 
should always be avoided. If the technician falls 
into the water during transfer, they may not be 
visible to the person piloting the vessel, which 
may lead to the technician being struck by the 
vessel. 
Stepping over to or climbing structures is 
considered as working at height, therefore 
working at height rules apply. Technicians should 
be protected against falls when climbing, which 
can be achieved by using permanent fall arrest 
systems (if the structure is equipped with it) or 
twin fall arrest lanyards. The possibility of the 
sudden movement of the vessel should be 
considered when climbing with fall arrest. The 
use of PFDs is highly recommended (may be 
mandated by the site) even if fall arrest 
equipment is used. 
 
Vessel crews have extensive knowledge and experience of weather, sea conditions and sailing. Asking  
for advice and following the vessel crew’s instructions, may help prevent incidents and accidents. 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex S 
 
© IRATA International 
Annex S: Page 10 of 10 
    03/10/2024 v001
 
S.12 Useful Links 
• 
International Maritime Organisation (IMO): International Maritime Organisation (imo.org) 
• 
International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO): ISO 12402-2:2020(en), Personal flotation 
devices — Part 2: Lifejackets, performance level 275 — Safety requirements 
• 
European Standard (EN): ISO 12402-4:2020 (en-standard.eu) 
• 
United States Coast Guard (USCG): PFD Selection, Use, Wear & Care (uscg.mil) 
