 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice 
for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3: Informative Annexes 
Annex T: Tensioned Lines Guidance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 2 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
CONTENTS 
1 
SCOPE AND PURPOSE ................................................................................................................ 3 
2 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................. 3 
3 
ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................................................... 3 
4 
APPLICATIONS OF TENSIONED LINES ...................................................................................... 4 
4.1 
HORIZONTAL AND DIAGONAL TENSIONED LINES FOR WORK POSITIONING ................................... 4 
4.2 
HORIZONTAL TENSIONED LINES FOR WORK POSITIONING (VARIABLE ANCHORS) ......................... 4 
4.3 
DIAGONAL TENSIONED LINES .................................................................................................... 5 
4.4 
HORIZONTAL TENSIONED LINES FOR WORK RESTRAINT ............................................................. 6 
4.5 
HORIZONTAL TENSIONED LINES FOR FALL ARREST .................................................................... 7 
4.6 
HORIZONTAL AND DIAGONAL TENSIONED LINES FOR RESCUE .................................................... 8 
5 
RISKS AND HAZARDS ................................................................................................................ 10 
5.1 
ANCHOR FAILURE................................................................................................................... 10 
5.2 
EQUIPMENT FAILURE .............................................................................................................. 11 
5.3 
ROPE FAILURE ....................................................................................................................... 11 
6 
CONTROLLING RISKS AND HAZARDS .................................................................................... 13 
7 
ANCHORS .................................................................................................................................... 14 
7.1 
DESCENDERS ........................................................................................................................ 14 
7.2 
ANCHOR LINES ...................................................................................................................... 14 
8 
IRATA TRAINING AND ASSESSMENT ...................................................................................... 16 
9 
POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS, HAZARDS AND CONTROL MEASURES FOR TENSIONED 
LINES ............................................................................................................................................ 17 
10 REFERENCES .............................................................................................................................. 17 
11 FURTHER READING .................................................................................................................... 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 3 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
1 
SCOPE AND PURPOSE 
This Annex is intended to provide informative guidance and to raise awareness of the potential risks 
and hazards associated with using tensioned lines in industrial rope access. It also provides information 
that may be applied when delivering the training and assessment of tensioned lines, in accordance with 
the IRATA ‘Training, Assessment and Certification Scheme’ (TACS) [TC-101], Section 6.4.12 - 
‘Tensioned Lines’. 
 
DISCLAIMER: The information and illustrations within this Annex are provided for informative purposes only. This 
document is not intended to replace appropriate training, planning, competency and job specific risk assessments.  
2 
INTRODUCTION 
Tensioned lines are ropes rigged between two sets of anchors (extremity or end anchors) to facilitate 
horizontal or diagonal movement, or to provide variable/intermediate anchor points for the working and 
backup lines, thereby enabling access to areas where there may be no other suitable or available option. 
‘Horizontal’ tensioned lines are ropes tensioned between suitable anchors that are at the same or similar 
elevation, and ‘Diagonal’ tensioned lines are a set of ropes tensioned between suitable anchors which 
are at different elevations at each end.  
 
Dependant on the country, region or state, tensioned lines may be referred to as Tyrolean Traverse 
Lines (Tyroleans), Tensioned Ropes, Highlines, Zip-Lines, Telphers and Tram Ways. 
 
Currently no standard refers specifically to the industrial application of tensioned lines, or the application 
of descenders or other rope access equipment in the creation of a tensioned lines system. However, 
existing standards and requirements may be applicable to each component and it’s use.  
 
Using a descender or other rope access equipment as an adjustable anchor, or part of the anchor 
system, may not be included in the equipment’s ‘Instructions for Use’ or ‘User Manual’; as such, 
information regarding the suitability and use of the equipment for this purpose should be sought from 
the manufacturer. 
 
Note: Tensioned lines (used in industrial rope access) differ from pre-made/off the shelf ‘lifelines’, as tensioned 
lines must meet the requirements of the ‘Personal Fall Protection Systems’ - EN 795 (Type C) regulation. 
3 
ABBREVIATIONS 
MBL  
Maximum Breaking Load 
PFPE 
Personal Fall Protection Equipment 
SWL 
Safe Working Load 
WLL  
Working Load Limit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 4 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
4 
APPLICATIONS OF TENSIONED LINES 
Note: The applications of tensioned lines are non-exhaustive, however, the images within this Annex demonstrate 
some possible examples.  
4.1 Horizontal and Diagonal Tensioned Lines for Work Positioning 
In industrial rope access, where there are potentially no suitable or available anchor points to provide 
access to the work area, e.g. access to install lights in the middle of an atrium, bridge inspections, 
working under a ceiling etc, tensioned lines systems are commonly used to provide positioning and 
variable/intermediate anchor points for the working and backup lines. 
4.2 Horizontal Tensioned Lines for Work Positioning (Variable Anchors) 
 
 
Figure 1: Horizontal Work Positioning - A simple tensioned lines system which has been installed to 
allow a simple connection by the technician to the system, thereby enabling them to pull themselves 
along the system to gain access to the working area. This example is rigged releasable to allow the 
technician to be lowered to an area of safety below (if required). 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Horizontal with Variable/Intermediate Anchor - A simple tensioned lines system where the 
anchors are rigged to enable the technician to access the work location. Consideration should be given 
to the access techniques used to minimise any potential for shock loading. The use of tandem 
descending devices may be considered.  
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 5 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
4.3 Diagonal Tensioned Lines  
 
Figure 3: Diagonal Work Positioning – A diagonal tensioned lines system which includes a required 
control system for ascent and descent of the technician whilst they are attached. This example is rigged 
releasable to allow the technician to be lowered to an area of safety below (if required). 
 
 
Figure 4: Diagonal with Variable/Intermediate Anchor - A diagonal tensioned lines system where 
the anchors are rigged to enable the technician to access the work location. Consideration should be 
given to the equipment and techniques used to position the anchors on the tensioned lines, to maintain 
the required location. This example is rigged releasable to allow the technician to be lowered to an area 
of safety below (if required). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 6 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
4.4 Horizontal Tensioned Lines for Work Restraint 
Work restraint (travel restriction) is a technique where Personal Fall Protection Equipment (PFPE) is 
used to prevent a technician from reaching areas where the risk of a fall from height exists. 
 
Horizontal tensioned lines may be used to provide an anchor for work restraint equipment (e.g. fixed or 
adjustable lanyards), enabling safe access to the work area, e.g. the edge of a roof. A single suitable 
connection is acceptable when work restraint techniques and equipment are used correctly, therefore, 
a single tensioned line may be used as an anchor line for the work restraint of a single technician. 
 
Horizontal tensioned lines used for work restraint should restrain the technician within a safe area where 
they remain supported by the structure, thereby mitigating against the possibility of a fall. Potential 
snagging or stretching of the line/lines should be accounted for, especially when using long work 
restraint lines. 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Horizontal Tensioned Lines for Work Restraint - A simple restraint system rigged to 
prevent the technician from being able to access/fall over an unprotected edge. 
 
Note: The regulations and requirements for acceptable equipment and setup for work restraints may vary 
dependant on the country, region or state, e.g. manufactured temporary horizontal safety lifeline anchorage (with 
or without a built-in shock absorber) may be a mandatory requirement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 7 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
4.5 Horizontal Tensioned Lines for Fall Arrest 
Tensioned lines used as horizontal anchor lines for fall arrest are often referred to as lifelines. Pre-made 
flexible horizontal lifeline systems or cable ways are available on the market and are classified under 
the ‘Personal Fall Protection Systems’ - EN 795 (Type C) regulation. A lifeline is described as a “flexible 
(cables or synthetic ropes) system that allows the worker to move horizontally along a structure while 
remaining continuously connected to the fall arrest system.” Some of these systems may include a 
shock absorber to reduce the forces generated during a fall, whilst others require the technician to 
connect to the system by using fall arrest lanyards. 
 
        When ropes are rigged with the intention to be used as lifelines, the created tensioned lines system 
should be used with fall arrest lanyards, and be rigged at a height that is easy to reach and reduces the 
distance of a potential fall to a minimum. 
 
With both the pre-made and rope-based systems, the use of appropriate anchors is key (a minimum 15 
kN static load required). Some manufacturers have conducted tests on falls (shock loading) on 
tensioned lines and have published their findings which should be considered when planning and using 
tensioned lines for fall arrest. 
 
When fall arrest techniques, equipment and systems are used, suitable clearance distances and an 
appropriate rescue/casualty retrieval plan must be in place. These considerations are often overlooked 
or neglected. The system should be designed and installed in a manner, that should a fall occur, the 
technician will not collide with any obstructions below. A rescue plan and fall arrest system should be 
in place that enables the rescuer(s) to quickly bring the casualty to a place of safety. 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Horizontal Tensioned Lines for Fall Arrest - A simple fall arrest system rigged above the 
technician to minimise the potential fall distance. This example utilises twin fall arrest lanyards, where 
both connectors are attached to both tensioned lines. 
 
The following should be considered when using a tensioned lines system for fall arrest: 
• 
Lifelines/tensioned lines systems with an integrated shock absorber should not be used with fall 
arrest lanyards.  
• 
Lifelines/tensioned lines systems without an integrated shock absorber should be used with fall 
arrest lanyards. 
 
Note: The regulations and requirements for acceptable equipment and setup for work restraints may vary 
dependant on the country, region or state, e.g. manufactured temporary horizontal safety lifeline anchorage (with 
or without a built-in shock absorber) may be a mandatory requirement. 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 8 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
4.6 Horizontal and Diagonal Tensioned Lines for Rescue 
A rescue plan may include the use of tensioned lines to retrieve/recover a casualty e.g. using a 
releasable tension line to lower the casualty to an area of safety or using tensioned lines as ‘Tram 
Ways/Zip-Lines’ alongside extra lines to move the casualty along the tensioned lines system.  
 
Such rescues are classified as ‘complex’ and it is vital that the rescue team are trained and competent 
in such techniques and are familiar with the rescue plan, and their roles in a rescue situation.  
 
When planning this type of a rescue, rope stretching, snagging and the protection of the ropes and 
anchors should be considered. 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Diagonal Tensioned Lines System for Rescue – A system where the casualty can be 
raised and lowered on the tensioned lines to adjust their position using gravity. 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Horizontal Tensioned Lines System for Rescue with Multi-Directional Rigging – A 
horizontal system which includes hauling that is positioned at both ends to enable multi-directional 
positioning of the casualty. 
 
Note: See the ‘ICOP’ [TC-102], ‘Annex R: Rescue and Evacuation Planning, and Considerations’ for additional 
rescue information. 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 9 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
4.7 Horizontal and Diagonal Tensioned Lines for Tool and Material 
Transportation or Positioning 
 
Tensioned lines may be used to move or position tools or materials. The failure of tensioned lines used 
for this purpose can have severe consequences, e.g. tools or materials may drop causing injury or 
death. Therefore, the system should be designed, calculated and set-up following the same principles 
as those used for personnel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 10 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
5 
RISKS AND HAZARDS 
The primary hazard when rigging and using tensioned lines systems is excessive loading of the 
components by over tensioning, or shock loading the system. Increased loads in the system are 
inherent due to the higher rigging/loading angles created. The risk of overloading the tensioned lines 
system is particularly great when it is used as a safety lifeline anchor system for fall arrest. 
Technicians commonly over tension the lines to minimise sagging when the system is under tension. 
However, tests indicate that applying high tension to the lines results in minimal change to the sag, 
whilst significantly increasing the load on the components of the system. 
5.1 Anchor Failure 
Understanding the correlation between rigging angles and the loading on the extremity anchors is 
important when planning and installing tensioned lines. Tensioning the lines results in a permanent load 
on the anchors (and all the other components of the system), and when combined with the additional 
weight of the technician (plus equipment and tools), and the high angle loading, this may result in 
unacceptably high loads at the extremity anchors. Additionally, the potential loads on the extremity 
anchors when subject to a fall arrest will be significantly higher than in an un-tensioned system.  
When descending devices are used for tensioning the system, consideration should be given to the 
Working Load Limit (WLL) and the determined Safe Working Load (SWL) of the device(s), to ensure 
that the loads do not exceed these limits.  
Descenders may not be certified as anchor devices, however, they must still meet the requirements of 
the applicable standard(s). Some manufacturers have conducted tests on descenders that have been 
used as adjustable anchors, and have published their findings which may highlight foreseeable forces 
on the devices, such as different loading capacities and the applications of the devices. During testing, 
loads have been shown to stay below the damage threshold value. However, it is important for the 
person(s) designing and using the tensioned lines system to familiarise themselves with the test loading 
values, test scenarios, and to ensure that these are not exceeded during operations. 
Equal load sharing between the anchors at each end of the tensioned lines, and across the anchor 
lines, is vital to avoid exceeding the WLL of the individual anchors and other components to minimise 
the risk of failure. 
Anchor failure can be catastrophic in any situation. Due to the complexity involved in calculating 
potential loads when using a tensioned lines system, it is recommended that this type of system is only 
used when the anchors are “unquestionably reliable”, and the system is installed by a competent 
person(s).  
The illustrations below are intended to demonstrate and raise awareness of the relationship between 
loading angles and the loading on the anchors, i.e. an increase in the loading angle, increases the 
loading on the anchors and other components of the tensioned lines system. 
                 
 
 
The above illustrations are based on a scenario where the lines do not stretch, and the loading angle 
remains the same. It is important to note that ropes such as low stretch ‘kernmantle’ stretch under 
loading, and therefore the loading angles may decrease as the downward loading on the tensioned 
lines increases. The illustrations should be used as a guide when calculating loading on the anchor 
lines and other components of a tensioned lines system.  
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 11 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
5.2 Equipment Failure  
• 
Descending devices are effective and easy to use for tensioning lines as they maintain high 
tension and are easy to release when needed, e.g. to lower a casualty or when the tensioned 
lines are no longer needed. As descenders are designed for one or two-person loads (e.g. in 
case of a rescue), the loading on them when used in tensioned lines systems may exceed normal 
working loads, resulting in physical damage or loss in functionality of the descender, for example 
a descender is required to be releasable in the event of a rescue but becomes stuck. 
• 
Ascending devices, rope grabs and pullies may be used to provide a mechanical advantage 
when tensioning lines. The SWL of these devices may be exceeded if they are not used correctly 
and in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Improper use of devices must be 
avoided; whilst this may not result in equipment failure, it may still cause damage to the device 
itself or the anchor lines e.g. an overloaded toothed ascender may cause damage to the rope. 
5.3 Rope Failure 
The SWL of the ropes should be considered when designing, calculating loads, rigging and using 
tensioned lines systems. 
Note: The highest possible loading the system may be subjected to (worst case scenario) should be considered 
when planning and using tensioned lines systems, e.g. two-person loading, shock loading etc. 
Toothed devices may start damaging the outer sheath of a rope when the loading is approximately 4kN 
- 6.5kN (depending on the type, diameter, age, condition etc. of the rope and the device). Depending 
on their position and grip on a rope, a single person can pull 20-40 Kg with a solid stance on the ground. 
This, combined with a 9:1 pully system, may result in the toothed device damaging the outer sheath of 
the rope.  
Both the path of the tensioned lines and the sag in the rope when loaded should be considered during 
planning and rigging to avoid sharp edges, abrasions, hot surfaces and any other hazards to the lines 
or the technicians. If contact between the lines and a hazard is unavoidable, appropriate rope protection 
should be considered and implemented. 
Calculating the exact amount of sag in tensioned lines is only possible in theoretical scenarios due to 
multiple factors that contribute to sag in a real-life scenario. However, a 1m sag over a 10m long line 
(span), under a 100Kg load, is an approximation that can be used to estimate sag as illustrated below: 
 
Figure 9: This illustration provides a guide to determining sag in a horizontal tensioned lines system. 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 12 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
Factors that affect sag in a tensioned lines system include the: 
• 
length of the tensioned lines (span) e.g. longer lines result in more sag; 
• 
number of lines in the system e.g. 3 lines instead of 2 lines will stretch less under the same load, 
therefore the sag will be reduced; 
• 
weight of the load e.g. a heavier load will result in more sag; 
• 
amount of tension in the system; and 
• 
type, make and age of the ropes being used. 
 
Note: The above list is non-exhaustive. 
Excessive slack in the connecting lanyards between the tensioned lines and the technician’s harness, 
present a substantial risk when used for work positioning or fall arrest. Dynamic or shock loading 
tensioned lines has the potential to overload any or all components of the system, and may result in 
system failure, or make it difficult or impossible to release the system by operating the descending 
device, as the device has become seized. 
When designing and using a tensioned line system, consideration should be given to the potential for 
the system to be used/misused by multiple technicians simultaneously. When using or relying on the 
same tensioned lines system there is a risk of overloading the anchors, and/or any component, leading 
to system failure.  
The risk of tensioned lines being damaged by a third party is often overlooked, and mitigating factors 
are not considered. Damage to the lines may result from: 
• 
spilling harmful chemicals on the lines;  
• 
unforeseen crane operations or movement;  
• 
tools or other machinery being used in close proximity; 
• 
high temperature objects in contact with or in close proximity of the lines; and/or 
• 
the lines being tampered with. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 13 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
6 
CONTROLLING RISKS AND HAZARDS 
The following non-exhaustive list includes actions and considerations which may assist in controlling 
the hazards associated with using tensioned lines systems:   
• 
conducting a comprehensive risk assessment;  
• 
appropriate planning, e.g. anchor selection, positioning, rescue provision etc.;  
• 
competent design and installation of the system;  
• 
appropriate testing and inspection of equipment and setup, e.g. anchor bolts etc.;   
• 
suitable onsite management and supervision;  
• 
appropriate checking of the system due to complexity;   
• 
awareness of the work environment; and 
• 
awareness of human factors that may present risk, e.g. lack of knowledge, deliberate misuse, 
complacency etc. 
Tensioned lines should only be installed by a competent person and should be planned, calculated and 
adequately risk assessed prior to installation and use. The use of tensioned lines should be supervised 
with a comprehensive rescue plan in place. 
Note: Check relevant local legislations regarding the requirements for the installation and use of tensioned lines 
and if there is a requirement for a third party to approve such systems in the country or region of use. Some regions 
have specific requirements regarding the training, use, and installation of fall arrest systems/equipment. 
Effective control measures used to reduce the loading on the components of a tensioned lines system 
to acceptable levels, include sharing the load across the anchor lines or using load sharing rigging. 
Shock loading tensioned lines must be avoided. Using two descenders may be considered when 
tensioned lines are used for work positioning or as an anchor system to prevent shock loading in the 
event of a main line failure. 
The IRATA safe system of work requires the application of the ‘principal of double protection’, whereby 
there is an appropriate secondary connection to back up the technician should a single component of 
the system fail. With a tensioned lines system, the complexity of the rigging and techniques used may 
increase the potential for error, therefore increasing the importance of ensuring that double protection 
is implemented within the system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 14 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
7 
ANCHORS 
The introduction of tension into a system applies a load to the anchors before any physical load is 
suspended, because of this, loads are greater than those which would be applied by simply suspending 
the load directly from the anchor.  
 
When selecting, fitting and using anchors, the principle of double protection applies and, therefore, at 
least two anchors should always be used (at each end of the tensioned lines system). 
 
Rope access anchors should be of an adequate strength, bearing in mind the mass of the user including 
any equipment worn or carried and any additional forces that may occur due to high rigging angles and 
shock loading. 
 
Note: Anchor strength is critical in tensioned lines systems because of the additional loads applied in these 
systems. 
The recommended combined static strength of anchors should be at least 15 kN, and the loading should 
be shared between the independent anchors to reduce the likelihood of overloading. 
It is important to establish foreseeable angles of loading (consider: multiplier effects caused by increase 
in angles) and anticipate potential loads when designing and using an anchor system, such as tools, 
two persons loading and shock loading. This will indicate whether any component of the tensioned lines 
system is going to be overloaded during operational use or rescue. 
Some descenders may slip under certain loading, allowing the rope to slip through, thereby introducing 
slack into the system and reducing loading angles, which subsequently reduces the loading on the 
anchors and all other components of the system. This function of the descender may help prevent the 
tensioned line system from overloading. Check the manufacturers information to confirm if the device 
can be used in this manner and has the required characteristics.  
When using anchor slings to create the anchors, they should be protected at wear points, taking into to 
consideration a change in position when the lines are loaded. Anchor slings (both man-made fibre and 
wire) should be installed in such a manner so they won’t slide in any direction when the tension lines 
are placed under loading. 
Note: Anchor slings made from man-made fibres should have sewn joints and have a minimum static strength of 
22 kN. Anchor slings made from wire rope should have a minimum static strength of 15 kN. Additional anchors, 
other than those used in the tensioned lines systems may be required to facilitate work mate retrieval. 
7.1 Descenders 
Some equipment manufacturers have carried out testing and published instructions and 
recommendations on using their descenders for tensioning tensioned lines (see Section 10). 
Descenders should only be used for tensioning tensioned lines if recommended for such application by 
the manufacturer.  
Users should read the relevant documentation published by the manufacturer. Devices without available 
information on their use in such a manner either shouldn’t be used (in tensioned lines systems) or the 
manufacturer should be contacted for further information and guidance. 
7.2 Anchor Lines 
Ropes or anchor lines are subject to increased loads when used in tensioned lines systems. The loads 
in these systems should be calculated by a competent person taking into consideration the SWL of the 
rope and the weakening effect of the anchor line terminations or knots, when implementing measures 
to ensure the system is safe.  
Tests show that using a 3:1 mechanical advantage with a maximum of two persons pulling on it is 
sufficient for tensioning and should not be exceeded. Even this setup will result in constant tension in 
the system which applies a constant load to the components. This should not be high enough to 
compromise the safety of the system when it is loaded by the weight of the technician. 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 15 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
Too much sag in the system should be controlled by using either higher anchor points or increasing the 
number of lines per technician to reduce rope stretch, as opposed to increasing the tension in the 
system. 
Backing up the lines to the anchors, behind the device used for tensioning, may be considered as a 
failsafe in case of the failure of the tensioning device. However, the suitability and viability of this method 
should be assessed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and take into account the 
potential loss of the ability to release the system should it be required.  
The use of a single tensioned line system is acceptable when it is used for work restraint and the 
possibility of a fall (shock loading) is eliminated. For all other applications a minimum of 2 ropes are 
required per technician. When using a twin rope tensioned line system, always share the loading 
between the lines; never only load a single line. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 16 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
8 
IRATA TRAINING AND ASSESSMENT 
The IRATA ‘TACS’ [TC-101] syllabus (Levels 2 and 3) includes the training and assessment on the 
theory, application and use of tensioned lines systems. This knowledge is the foundation for their on-
site application and should provide sufficient knowledge to the candidates to enable them to set up and 
use such systems safely outside of the training environment. 
Instructors should explain that some devices may slip when subjected to certain loading, which can be 
advantageous (but not without risk) when used in a tensioned lines system, as they reduce the rigging 
angles and the loading on the components. 
Note: It is also worth noting that this may introduce other hazards e.g. if the device doesn’t stop slipping after the 
overload, and the work is being carried out over water, hot surface etc. than an unconscious user could be lowered 
into a dangerous environment.  
Instructors should emphasise the importance of reading, understanding, and adhering to the 
manufacturer’s instruction(s)/publication(s), or the need to confirm with the manufacturer if the intended 
use of the device is not covered within these documents. 
Assessors should note that only devices that have manufacture’s guidance and information on their use 
in a tensioned lines system should be used for this purpose, and diversion (misuse) from the 
manufacturer’s instructions of use should result in a ‘Minor or Major Discrepancy’. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRATA International Code of Practice for Industrial Rope Access 
Part 3 of 4: Informative Annexes: Annex T 
 
© IRATA International 
      Annex T: Page 17 of 17 
26/09/2025 v001
 
9 
POTENTIAL 
APPLICATIONS, 
HAZARDS 
AND 
CONTROL 
MEASURES FOR TENSIONED LINES 
The table below provides examples of potential applications, and the associated hazards and control 
measures of tensioned lines systems: 
Application 
Potential Hazard 
Potential Control Measure 
Anchor line system used for work 
positioning 
Overloading the anchors, resulting in 
anchor failure 
• Appropriate training and supervision of the 
rope access team 
• Correct selection of appropriate anchors (min 
15kN) 
• Effective planning 
• Pre-use checks of the system 
Work restraint system used for 
travel restrictions 
The system is set-up or used in a 
manner that does not prevent the 
technician from reaching the area 
where a potential fall can occur  
(accidental or deliberate misuse) 
• Using the correct length of fixed lanyards or 
correct use of adjustable lanyard to avoid areas 
where falls may occur  
• Effective planning – consider the stretching and 
snagging of ropes 
Fall arrest lifelines 
The anchor is overloaded resulting in 
anchor failure 
• Use fall arrest lanyards to reduce the loading 
on the system if a fall occurs 
Fall arrest lifeline too low resulting in 
an impact with the ground or a 
structure in the event of a fall  
• The tensioned lines should be set at shoulder 
level or higher to reduce the fall distance 
• Selection and use of appropriate PFPE which 
takes clearance distance into consideration  
Tensioned lines used for rescues 
The tensioning device becomes 
seized preventing the release of the 
rope 
• Check the manufacturer’s publication(s) about 
falls (shock loading) on tensioned lines 
systems 
• Avoid overloading the tensioned lines system 
Directional 
guidelines 
for 
a 
technician to descend or ascend 
via another rope access system 
Equipment failure 
• Back up the lines of the tensioned lines 
systems to the anchor points 
Tensioned lines used for work 
positioning, fall arrest, or moving 
tools or materials 
Equipment slippage 
• Use releasable knots in tails, if recommended 
/permitted by the manufacturer 
10 REFERENCES 
ICOP [TC-102]: 
• 
2.7.8.2 Device Lanyards and Anchor Lanyards 
• 
2.7.8.3 Anchor Slings 
• 
2.7.8.4 Selection Criteria for Device Lanyards, Anchor Lanyards and Anchor Slings 
• 
2.7.9 Anchors 
• 
2.11.2 The Anchor System (Anchors and Anchor Lines) 
• 
Annex L, L.2.6.7 Horizontal Anchor Lines 
TACS [TC-101]: 
• 
6.4.12 Tensioned Lines 
11 FURTHER READING 
• 
Skylotec publication: Sirius, Spark and Spark Tactical in Tyrolean Traverses 
• 
Petzl publication: Tensioning a Tyrolean with Maestro, ID, Rig 
• 
ISC Wales publication: Work and Rescue Descender User Manual 
• 
Personal Fall Protection Systems - EN 795 (Type C) 
 
